## What is a Videogame?

Videogames are software and, as such, have many of the usual characteristics of software products. Videogames evolve with technology and the best of them actually push the limits of technology a bit forward. The industry of dedicated video hardware is a living example. Every year, NVidia, Intel and AMD struggle for designing faster and faster GPUs to keep up the pace that videogames consumer all over the world require. This in turn benefits other areas that use GPU a lot (high-performance scientific computing and computer aided design), but who are by themselves not powerful enough to drive the industry.

However, videogames have a fundamental difference with the rest of the software, and is this: Most software (if not all) is designed to provide some service, to aid in some task. In the general sense, every software has an objective purpose, a milestone that can be quantified, tested, quality assured and documented. Videogames are the only piece of software We know of whose sole purpose is subjective: **to entertain**. We know, you are thinking about *other entertainment software*, like media players. But even these have the objective purpose of playing music, rendering video, etc, unlike videogames. Surely, the purpose of Mario (the videogame) is **not** to rescue the princess, even though that is the purpose of Mario (the character). The purpose of every videogame, as stated by its makers in the value proposition section of the business model, is not to save the world, build a civilization, kill some zombies, is to entertain.

Well, then if videogames are a form of entertainment, we can try to define them by looking at what makes them unique between all other forms of entertainment. Modern AAA videogames can be compared to *movies*. They exhibit a compelling story, lots of characters and scenarios, and certainly lots of visual effects. However, the one key element that differentiates games from movies (or other animated forms of entertainment) is **interaction**. So, in a form, videogames are like *interactive animations*, where the player is no longer an spectator, but more like a director, whose decisions influence the outcome of the play.

However, there are many games, specially smaller ones, that are far away from anything resembling a movie. Think about  Angry Birds, Cut the Rope, Candy Crush, etc. Yes, there is a component of animation there, but certainly neither the characters nor the story are the key elements. These games are more like *puzzles*, in the sense that the entertainment arises from solving a complicated problem. However, even though there is a subset of videogames that are essentially puzzles in the form of computer programs, most videogames include puzzle-solving mechanics but present a far richer gameplay, that brings a new element which puzzles lack: **re-playability**. In this sense, videogames can be seen as *dynamic puzzles*, because the actual puzzle that needs to be solved can change and evolve over time based on the game state, and present new challenges different for every play and player.

Here we have the two opposite extremes of the videogame complexity continuum: puzzle-games and movie-games. In between we can find many genres, from strategy games to action games, to platform games, to graphic adventures, to role-play games to simulation games. To unify all these types of games under a single conception, we'll need to look at the most primary form of entertainment: *the toy*. In a sense, videogames are just the evolution of toys, and that is precisely what makes them so fun. They wake up our inner child, and gives us the chance to free our imagination, just like toys do. Check it out, and you'll see that in almost any game you can find the toy within, the part of the game that evokes our childhood. For platform games is easy, everyone had an action figure the used to play with, running and flying around the house. Simulation and strategy games make you remember your collection of little soldiers, or your tiny farm. Action games are the easiest, kids love guns. And yes, that is the reason why The Sims is the best selling game of all times. Its the ultimate toy cleverly disguised as a videogame.

Is this it? Are videogames just the same old toys disguised as computer programs? Well, not really. Videogames borrow a lot from toys to access our need for fun. But videogames bring something to the mix that enhances the toy mechanic, and is precisely where the game-part comes from: videogames have **rules** and **objectives**. When playing with toys, children invent the rules as they go, and change them as they see fit, with the necessary dosis of argument when two opposite rulesets collide. Videogames, like real-action games (hide and seek, soccer, marbles, chess) have a definite set of rules agreed upon before starting to play. This adds something important to the mix, because it brings order and ensures that all parties have an understanding of what can and cannot be done. However, rules restrict, and by itself, they can only decrease the level of entertainment provided. A toy with rules is not a very funny thing to play with, because it takes away from you some liberties, and gives you nothing. For that, we need objectives.
